so something you hear from people all
the time about the universe is that it
is expanding and we've known this for
nigh on a century now that when we look
out into space all the other galaxies
are moving away from us they're all red
shifted and so people tend to ask well
if all the galaxies are moving apart
because the universe is expanding then
how come galaxies collide so there's a
constant push-pull going on in the
universe all the time between gravity on
one side and the expansion of the
universe on the other so we know gravity
exists because well we're not currently
floating offices in the earth and the
earth is still going around the Sun and
the stars are all going around the
center of the Milky Way and it's from
observing those kind of things that
we've been able to piece together a
theory of gravity ie equations which
describe what we're seeing our best
theory is that of general relativity
Einstein's theory and every place that
we've tested that theory it's them right
so the orbit of mercury or gas around
the outskirts of a black hole so much so
that now we can actually employ those
equations in technology and so every
time you pull out your phone and use
your GPS to find out where you are in
the world satellites around the earth
are using Einstein's theory of general
activity to help correct for
gravitational influences and figure out
where you are on planet earth on the
other side you've got the expansion of
the universe something we've accepted is
happening since the 1920s when Hubble
first looked out and dromeda nebula and
found out that it wasn't a nebula in our
own Milky Way you know only say a
hundred thousand light years away but
that it was a galaxy of stars in its own
right that was actually millions of
light years away and when he looks at
other galaxies in the sky as well he
found that the more distant they were
the more their light had been red
shifted which meant that they were
moving away from us at a faster rate so
if all the galaxies in the universe are
moving away from us then if we sort of
rewind time we obviously end up in that
sort of Big Bang scenario where the
universe starts from this at a impetus
of lease mall incredibly dense point
Hubble's discovery triggered so much
debate about the
universe and whether it was formed in a
big bang and what its current state was
as well but eventually this idea of an
expanding universe in the Big Bang
became accepted as more and more
evidence was found say for example the
discovery of the Cosmic Microwave
Background in the 1960s by pin Dyson
Wilson which was kind of like an echo of
the radiation left over from the Big
Bang
now we don't really know what's causing
this expansion of the universe we give
it a name we call it dark energy well
that doesn't necessarily mean that we
know what it is we also know how much of
the universe's energy budget is in dark
energy we've been able to calculate that
from studying early universe in the
Cosmic Microwave Background
and the expansion of the universe as
well and found that it's about 75% of
all of the universe's energy budget has
gone into dark energy that's causing
this expansion rather than being locked
into matter so for example normal matter
which is about 5% the universe's energy
budget the rest of which is dark matter
so it has a name and we know how much of
the universe's energy budget it takes up
but that's really all we know like we
don't really know how it's causing the
expansion that's something that people
are still trying to answer like in
research departments across the world
right now so if you ask me in the
comments I'm gonna know so whilst we
think that this dark energy pervades all
of the universe in all space because
whichever direction we look into
whatever distances we see this expansion
happening gravity is a bit different
though because first of all it depends
on how close you are to something and
then also how heavy the object is that
you're close to so the equation that we
always quote is G the gravitational
constant times the mass of one object
the mass of the second object divided by
their separation squared this is why you
know we can launch rockets off the earth
that have managed to take the Voyager
probes completely out of the solar
system as long as we gave them enough
energy to overcome that force of gravity
then eventually they would escape the
gravitational pull of the Sun when they
got to a big enough distance so for
small distances like in the solar system
and for huge mass
is like four galaxies then gravity
dominates it wins out over dark energy
it has a stronger pull than the push of
the expansion of the universe outwards
it's why the earth isn't moving away
from the Sun because of the expansion of
space we're at the same distance away
from the Sun all the time because
gravity holds us in that position
against the push outwards of the
expansion of space it's similar why
stars in our own Milky Way are not
moving away from the Sun because they're
held in that position by the whole
gravity of the whole Milky Way system
but it's also why galaxies can also
collide and merge because if you have
galaxies of hundreds of billions of
stars and then also containing dark
matter that's like five ten times more
than that as well then that force of
gravity pulling those two massive
objects together is going to be huge and
so even if they are millions of light
years away that force of gravity is
still going to be strong enough to
eventually pull them together and be the
push of the expansion of the universe
outwards so that they eventually collide
and merge which is why it's not correct
to say that all galaxies in the universe
are moving away from us because the
Milky Way is part of a little local
group of galaxies which includes the
large and small Magellanic Clouds which
will be familiar sites in the southern
sky to those of you in the southern
hemisphere and then also the Andromeda
galaxy are very familiar sight to people
in the Northern Hemisphere and because
of the force of gravity on all these
galaxies in this group they are all
destined to one day merge and become a
single galaxy so Andromeda is not red
shifted its light hasn't been stretched
by the expansion of space instead its
light is blue shifted because Andromeda
is actually moving towards us so the
light has been squashed as it's given
off from Andromeda on its way to us so
because that blue shift we tend to say
that it means that I'm dromeda it's
coming towards us but that's not quite
the right language because on dromeda is
much bigger than
Milkyway sort of like three to four
times bigger Andromeda has a trillion
stars in it whereas the Milky Way is
something like 200 to 400 billion last
count and so whilst yes they will both
be exerting a force of gravity on each
other
Andromeda will be exerting the bigger
Pole on the Milky Way and so technically
we're the ones moving towards Andromeda
and when we get there we are gonna
collide with it emerge probability of
two stars colliding though is very very
low check out my previous video that
I've done on that and what happened is
that beautiful spiral structure that we
think the Milky Way has and the
beautiful spiral structure that we've
seen that Andromeda hounds is gonna get
torn apart by all those forces of
gravity the stars will get flung out
everywhere and eventually the stars will
settle down on these random chaotic
orbits giving us this kind of giant blob
of a revenant galaxy that people like to
call milk comida oh and by the way this
is happening like four billion years in
the future I don't wanna panic anybody I
don't want anyone to have to think they
have to go running out and buying like
galactic merger insurance today because
it's so far in the future but after
we've merged with Andromeda the question
is you know will we merge with anything
else again but it's quite unlikely
because our local Group of galaxies is
in what we call a super void and a super
void is essentially a very low density
part of the universe they've got
incredibly low lumbers of galaxies in
that region of space than you would
expect from like the normal density and
it means that gravity's got absolutely
no chance of winning in those regions
and the expansion of space is going to
dominate so those super boys just get
bigger and bigger and bigger
leaving the galaxies that were
originally in them extremely isolated in
the vastness of space but it all depends
on whether gravity or dark energy this
expansion of space will win the overall
fight in the end this is what
cosmologists are currently trying to
measure they're trying to determine how
much mass is there in total in the
universe and is that enough to
counteract against the expansion
of space and so with the equations that
we have to describe gravity and the
expansion of the universe you can then
work out what the critical density of
Massah would be in the universe for
those two things to perfectly balance
that's one scenario that we could end up
with the expansion slows down and we end
up with this nice happy equilibrium
where the universe reaches a specific
size and we don't grow any further but
it could be that once we've measured the
amount of mass in the universe it's
actually less than that critical density
in which case there's nothing to stop
the expansion of the universe it would
continue accelerating for eternity
moving everything in the universe away
from each other
isolating galaxies in the vastness of
space so that when you look up you see a
dark night sky or you could have so much
mass in the universe that its density is
above that critical density in which
case you'd completely halt the expansion
and you would draw everything back in
again under the force of gravity ruling
everything back down to that impetus
null point where the Big Bang was in
what we like to call a Big Crunch or
again AB Gib as some people like to call
it because it's Big Bang backwards so
this is what cosmologists are trying to
do right now is measure that density of
matter in the universe and there's lots
of different teams doing this worldwide
using lots of different methods and
what's really interesting is that as the
decades wear on and they drill down how
precise they're able to get that value
as technology improves and the different
data techniques improve as well we get
closer and closer to thinking that we
live in a universe which has the exact
critical density to balance gravity and
dark energy perfectly always don't
mmm whoo oh my universe my nails are
shocking I really need to paint them
again just know one look at my nails
okay for the whole video I'm just gonna
like claw a nail like this the entire
time on the other side so let's just
sort of think about what each of those
two things I wait for you then mister
motorbike mrs. motorbike I don't know
shouldn't that's general relativity
Einstein's theory that he came up with
to describe how gravity oh where is the
Milky Way is say like 200 to 400 stars
just to just two hundred stars that's
all there is
or Kanab Gib organ a big no we're gonna
add Gabe I'm so sick around as fast as I
can I'm so sick of expanded as fast as I
wonder if I could get there quicker if
it wasn't for gravity that does not fit
I'm so sorry